And we're at Colavista.
And I have the pleasure of chatting with Les Appelt to try to record his memory of some of the key events that he recalls in recent A&M history.
Les, you graduated and went back to, after the war, you were back in Houston.
Right.
When did you become active in A&M affairs after the war?
A&M events, A&M activities?
I was a member of the
Associated Department of Students and really was so involved in what I was doing personally, probably the first 10 years after I got back from the service that other than contributed to the association and all.
I didn't get deeply involved.
I did get peripherally involved in the discussions and all that led up to A&M and co-ed.
As most everyone will recall, it wasn't exactly an A&M decision.
It was a decision by the courts in Texas that said that women had the right to go to A&M.
And I think that General Rudolf was obviously impressed by those court decisions.
I think that he sincerely felt it would be best for A&M to move into a co-ed situation so that he could have an opportunity to move forward and become one of the great universities.
Did you and your close friends in Houston have any feelings about co-education?
The Houston A&M Club had a meeting every Monday at the Rice Hotel.
That was just a tremendously hot item of discussion back and forth and back and forth.
And I recall one meeting that was particularly augmentative and I really became a little tired of listening to all of it and I stood up and said,
Look guys, the court has ruled that A&M is going to be go ahead.
It's going to happen.
And to tell you the truth, I think it's going to be good for them.
And Jimmy, I almost had to run from the door.
I've been fortunate to have been elected to do a lot of things, be president of the Associates Department students, involved with the foundation and many other activities, but I was never elected to be president of Houston and M Club, and it's most likely because of that little speech.
Later on, I was
taken as a honorary president of Houston A&M Club.
But that is after some of the old-timers that were that meeting in the 50s had already passed along.
In general, was the Houston A&M Club membership, you think, opposed to co-education?
At the time that we went there, the majority of the membership, particularly the old-timers that were really running into place,
Very much opposed.
They wanted to maintain the old military traditions, have everybody in the corps for that matter.
And obviously, when you look at the numbers and what it needed to be, it couldn't happen.
You couldn't have a corps that big.
You couldn't have everything that they still wanted.
It was really a matter that all of us have a problem with.
We like, if something good had happened when we were involved, we want it to stay that way.
And we are not willing to believe that the only constant is change.
And we want to lock it in right there, just on those things.
And that's what they were doing.
They weren't trying to do anything but what their heart said was what they thought was the right thing to do.
Looking back on it, what role do you see Earl Rudder playing in co-education?
Well, you see, Earl was the right person at the right time to do that job.
He had the personality, he had the respect, he had the charisma to do that job.
particular qualifications said that he could carry this off.
A person of lesser strength would not have been able to take that particular problem, say the bull by the horns, and move it and get it settled and done.
It probably would have drifted along.
It had happened, but it wouldn't have happened precisely and allowed him to go ahead and get it done and move ahead.
Have you ever heard any explanation as to how the board of directors came to identify Mr. Rutter as the next president?
How did they identify him instead of someone else?
I'm not privy to that.
I don't know that story either.
That's one of the ones I want to look for.
It's going to take someone older than myself, and you better hurry up and get them.
because he had done such a fine job as land commissioner.
Sterling Evans might.
That's what I'm hoping.
He might know that answer.
All right, then non-compulsory core.
Did the same people feel about opposition to making the core non-compulsory?
Was it the same people that were opposed to co-education?
But I didn't detect such a strong feeling in that area as it was on the co-eds.
After the co-eds subject was settled, I didn't see any real problem with making the core non-compulsory.
Alright now, when did you become active
in the Association of Former Students.
When did you begin to get there?
In the mid-60s.
I think that was the first time I held an office.
The first portfolio I had was public relations.
Who was the executive director then?
Buck Wyrus.
Describe Wyrus for someone that may never have known him.
Well, Buck was a sort of irreplaceable type person.
He turned out to be a good bridge between the old and the new.
He related real well to the old guard and he also related well to the student body and the younger Aggies and served as a real good bridge to move us from a nickel and dime association.
And really when I came on the board of the association,
Mr. McQuillan had been the head of the executive of the association squad and he was just the finest gentleman you've ever seen.
Very warm-hearted, really did all he could to get good
get all he could to raise funds for student loans, one of which he gave me, and highly respected and loved.
The thing that he couldn't quite wrap himself around was the fact that A&M people will respond to a higher level.
He just didn't seem to want to go out and ask Aggies to give over $10 to $25 a year.
And then we had a group on our board then.
Jeff McGonnell was there and was one of the breeders in this.
We had a really, really a pretty aggressive board and at the time we were printing the Texas Aggie on the versus the Xerox machine.
And through that leadership group there, which I'm proud to be a part of, we voted a budget for the
Texas Aggie, which is as fancy in the format it is now, just for that one item that was greater than the budget had ever been before.
And out of that came the Century Club deal.
We had to get the money and everybody thought it was a hundred dollars a year.
But membership in Century Club, nobody will join.
Well, that wasn't something.
The membership just got rolling and rolling and rolling and we all know now what's happened.
I don't know how many Century Club members we have, but there's a bunch.
Tens of thousands.
Do you know who, remember whose idea the Century Club was?
Does anybody deserve credit for having thought it up?
I'm not sure of that, but at that time, they said Jack Montgomery, Jim Sewell,
on the board and others on the board and we all wanted to do things and get things going and it was about to be in that same period that the President Dowd Scholarship deal was conceived which required a $25,000 donation and again they said nobody will do it but
there were five of us stepped up right away.
Right now, if I'm not mistaken, there are five of you, none of whom was really first.
It's five that were first, isn't it?
Well, that's the way we conceived it.
That's what I thought.
Anybody that wants to claim me first is all right.
Me, I don't care.
But the five original solid style ships.
You, Ford Albritton, Ross Weisenbaker, John Lindsay,
Who's the fifth one?
Maggie McGee.
And it was sort of, for most of us sort of a step up in the act of faith.
Let's see if we can get this to a new level.
And after that, of course,
largely due to Bob Latimer's insight into what needed to be done, the foundation was what you might call reactivated.
Yes, now tell me as much as you can about that.
How did it come to be reactivated?
Well, the way it come to be reactivated was this.
The foundation was established in the mid-50s.
And it was largely the work of Herman Heap and a few of his contemporaries.
And they established their board.
And Herman Heap and primarily him, but a few associates out of Houston, made some contributions.
They had, as I recall, never added to those original contributions.
And the foundation original charter provided that the Association of Former Students would alternatively with the administration
nominate people to the foundation board.
And the budget provided that if either of those nominating people did not make the nomination, that the other one could go ahead and make the nomination.
And from this forth, they would make all the nominations.
Well, I suppose the primary
Because of all of the problems that were involved in this co-ed and non-compulsory court deal, for one reason or another, the administration did not make a nomination.
The association made it and put the foundation as almost the sole child of the association.
The foundation was what?
Legally, the foundation officially belonged to whom?
It is a private foundation whose purpose was to, there was no other purpose other than to assist in Texas University.
But it was a separate, entirely independent.
Yes.
Which I don't think can be done anymore.
Probably not.
I think the laws now have stopped.
But at any rate, it is probably the most fortuitous thing that ever happened.
So Mr. Heap deserves a lot of credit for its being created.
Created.
I don't think he had any idea of what his potential was.
At least if they did, they wasted about
twenty-something, about eighteen years or so, not doing anything.
And I can still remember about that time, Pete Wayne, who was Arthur Anderson's chief in Houston, and I were really good friends, the classic party one with me and we'd have a life together.
He told me one day, he said, Les, you know one of the hardest things to do
is for somebody to give money to Texas A&M University.
They just make it too hard.
And so, in the early 70s, I was the alumni association president.
As I recall, Bob Latimer succeeded me
And Bob and I had a lot of discussions, but he was perceptive enough to see that the foundation needed to be strengthened, that it needed to be active and could do a great number of things.
I was very much there because I had been involved
by that time in two or three defenses of the Puff Fund, which periodically comes under attack from all universities outside of Texas and NM.
And Texas and NM have to rally together and try to defend it.
I felt that if we didn't have a substantial independent source
of income that A&M couldn't move forward and become a flagship university that they, that the pump fund is going to get nibbled.
Well, in retrospect, you can see that while it's still doing a function, it's getting nibbled all the time.
And the fact that we now are heading for a billion dollar foundation is going to do the thing that early on we envision it should be.
to take the place of some of the things that we're going to lose.
In the early 70s, when the foundation was reactivated, do you have any recollection of the approximate fund?
How big was the foundation's financial total then?
It had around $380,000 in my mind.
That was 1972, I think.
That time Bob appointed herself and some vacancies upon herself and I think Ken Montague and maybe Murray Fasten to the board and that gave it a different complexion.
The next
I was appointed for one year term.
And Bob had made the president come in and say, well, appointed us for one year term.
I want you to be appointed for a full ten years.
Which he did.
Nothing lost.
Were you then the chairman of the foundation board?
I don't remember when.
I was elected chairman.
Probably in 72 and then later in 76 or 78 I served two consecutive terms because Mary Faskin's term was sort of coming up and he said I can't travel around, I can't do all these things lest we serve another term and I did and then later on I was elected chairman another time or two.
employee of the foundation, who was the key fundraiser for the foundation?
Bob Walker.
Describe Walker's work at that time.
Well, Bob is right involved there.
He was
He worked with us and then he became Vice President of the University and Rutledge became the director or the foundation executive.
And I want to put or say this, that Bob Walker's devotions to A&M and all had a great deal to do with the success of the foundation because it had the old idea
prevailed, that these funds ought to move directly to the university.
And let's not let the foundation grow.
And I'm not going to say who was responsible for that, but the record will probably speak for itself if we get into it.
But there was a lack of trust between the association of former students at the university.
And it stemmed from the associations
dogged opposition back there to what the university official stuff had to be done.
It was one of those cases where both sides were wrong, in my opinion, partly, and we just had to go through that period and get everybody on the same track.
What were some of the first major gifts to the foundation that you would call?
Well, the Fasca Foundation
gave us some money and they labeled it.
They didn't specify it to be funds to death.
And then the foundation down in South Texas, the Rochelle Foundation, they gave lots of discretionary money.
And that was the money that enabled us
set up to an organization and all, and the importance of the Rochelle and passing early donations.
And some of the trustees gave minor sons to keep the ball rolling, but those two gave probably the early seed money that was so needed.
And I became, got into the foundation and became chairman due to the generosity of some of the residents of Houston.
I had an airplane made available to me.
And I flew in Austin, Amarillo, San Antonio, different places, and asked to have a meeting, usually an evening meeting, and explained to them that we had a foundation.
Very few people even knew we had a foundation.
And I think that's what Murray asked me because I was doing this thing as we continued to be chairman the second year.
But it started catching on.
Then fell out in West Texas.
The name of the research I can't think of right now.
Gave some land down near Deer Park and down in Pasadena area in Houston.
It was an adventure gift.
It had been sold, it had been quite a bit of money.
Their other gifts started coming in and about the time it looked like we was having a bad time, something else had happened.
We started doing some advertising.
Without mentioning the names, one of the old trustees that was having an order,
told us it was violating Texas trust laws and everything else must have been a foundation corpus for advertising.
And I remember Ken Montague looking right in the eye and said, look, if we have any trouble about that, I'll make up the difference.
But then it turned a little unfortunate about that
By that time Earl Runner died, Dr. Williams came on board.
He embraced the concept that the foundation could be a very meaningful deal.
I remember very well
He called, I think I was chairing at the time, and Jim Sewell was about to be, or just had been, and he called Sewell to his office and said, tell us about, tell me about the foundation.
How do y'all perceive it?
What is its function?
What will it do?
You know, and he said, for instance, ten years from now, how much money will it be in the foundation?
Jim and I looked at each other, and I said, well,
About that time we'd gotten up to about maybe three or four million dollars.
But the prospect really did look good.
We still had him going.
He said, well, I think we'll have 50 million dollars for the foundation in 1985.
So that's Williams asking the question?
Yes, he was asking the question.
And Sue and I were trying to answer it without having any solid basis for what we were saying.
I remember Jack making the audition.
He said, well, if you do, there's going to be a hell of a lot more people interested in that foundation than there are now.
And so, sure enough, in 1985, I think we had considerably more than that many of them in the beginning.
All right, let's back up a little.
How skillful was Mr. Rudder in working with the public?
Aggies and non-Aggies.
Describe his manner of working with people.
I thought that Earl's greatest ability was working with small groups in the room and chairs.
I don't think I'll attempt it to move out and be a real popular figure as far as popularity contests.
And at the time he was making the decisions he did, if he had been watching the polls, he wouldn't have had the fortitude to go do what he had to do.
Jack Williams was probably
more attuned to meeting the whole public and trying to draw strength from that than Earl was.
But it's a kind of strange thing.
And Earl was attuned close to academic progress, but not being an academic musician himself, you see.
it made it a little more difficult and Dr. Williams came in, it was easier for him to foresee what needed to be done and achieve a better and higher academic rating for painting and posture.
So in my opinion, we got some of the best
of times.
Earl had done the things that were tough, hard to do, and all.
And put A&M in a position, someone like Jack Reed, to try to move ahead in academic levels.
The student body was increasing, and the university was changing, and it's just moving and changing.
I tell in one of my speeches,
I say if you had reversed the order and put Williams first and Rudder second, it would have been terrible.
It wouldn't have worked.
But you had to have this one, and then this one could build on top of what the first one did.
That's right.
Make believe that you're, describe Jack Williams for someone that had never seen him or heard him.
Describe him and his style.
Well, let me say something that kind of shows his style.
One of Jack's favorite things when he was going out and meeting with longer groups and he took the time to go out and make any number of A&M club meetings all around the state.
One of the things that made me always think of me, he said, look, I'm looking at this audience and again,
I come to the conclusion that Aggies are the best ones in the world for all the Marys and so on.
I think if you think that through, you see how he approached that type of thing.
Some of the seriousness, young levity.
I was a great fan of him.
I thought he really had done just great things for him.
and moved us from one plane up into another plane.
And I won't say that Earl would have done the same thing, but as you pointed out, Jack couldn't have done the things that Earl did.
He would have been accused of not being an Aggie and not being a Texan.
Yeah, and it took somebody with the guts and fortitude and intelligence
of the program to carry us through that really difficult period.
During those years, who were the key board of, then I think board of directors, who were the key board members in those years?
Let me drop back.
Oh, please do.
On something that, real quick, in mid-sixties, Texas University was not getting